## Analytical hierarchical process (AHP)

AHP is an operations research (OR) tool mainly used in decision making.
The AHP helps decision makers to find an optimal decision that suits
their goal and problems. For those who were wondering, OR is a field of
applied mathematics that apply analytical methods for decision making.

In this post, I explain the basic concept of AHP using a simple example,
and explain how I use AHP to select my MSc Statistics dissertation
topic.

## Basics of AHP

## How I used it for decision making

The first time I encountered AHP was in early 2024. At that time, I was
a final year BSc Maths student in UBD and I took a module called
“Advanced Operations Research”.

### MSc Statistics disseration topic

For my MSc dissertation, there are about 40 projects offered to MSc
Statistics student. My main goal for the dissertation is to enhance my
statistical theory knowledge and also learn about its application. So, I
was thinking of choosing a project that consists of 80% theory and 20%
application.

My thought process of choosing my potential project is to remove any
projects that are mostly applied. Additionally, I removed any projects
that are related with time series analysis. While I did well in my time
series module and understand the statistical model and theory, I was not
really interested in exploring it further, and the project offered here
is related to finance, which is not interesting to me. Here are the list
of projects that I was interested in:

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 19%" />
<col style="width: 56%" />
<col style="width: 23%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr class="header">
<th>ID</th>
<th>Title</th>
<th>Research area</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td>P1</td>
<td>Assessing predictive performance of survival models</td>
<td>Survival Analysis</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>P2</td>
<td>Fitting Markov models</td>
<td>Stochastic Processes</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>P3</td>
<td>Estimation of sparse covariance matrix</td>
<td>Multivariate Analysis</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>P4</td>
<td>Joint Modelling of Longitudinal and Survival Data</td>
<td>Statistics in Medicine</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>P5</td>
<td>The origins of epidemics</td>
<td>Epidemiology</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>P6</td>
<td>Analysis of routine cancer data</td>
<td>Statistics in Medicine</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

## Criteria

These are the criteria I considered in the AHP:

1.  Theoretical: Does the project involves many statistical theory and
    mathematical derivations?

2.  Knowledge: How much do I know about the area of the project?

3.  Research area: How interested I am with the project in terms of area
    of research?

4.  Coding: How advanced the R coding skills required to take this
    project?

To construct the pairwise comparison matrix, I determined which
criterion is the most important.

-   For Theoretical, I moderately preferred (number 3) this to Knowledge
    and equally to moderately preferred (number 2) this to Coding.
-   I equally to moderately preferred (number 2) Knowledge to Coding.
-   Research area is the most important criterion, where I moderately to
    strongly preferred (number 4) this to Theoretical, very strongly
    preferred (number 7) this to Knowledge, and very strongly to
    extremely strongly preferred (number 8) this to Coding.

<table>
<caption>Pairwise Comparison Matrix for Hardware Systems</caption>
<thead>
<tr class="header">
<th style="text-align: left;"></th>
<th style="text-align: right;">System-1</th>
<th style="text-align: right;">System-2</th>
<th style="text-align: right;">System-3</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td style="text-align: left;">System-1</td>
<td style="text-align: right;">1.0000000</td>
<td style="text-align: right;">3.0000000</td>
<td style="text-align: right;">9</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td style="text-align: left;">System-2</td>
<td style="text-align: right;">0.3333333</td>
<td style="text-align: right;">1.0000000</td>
<td style="text-align: right;">6</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td style="text-align: left;">System-3</td>
<td style="text-align: right;">0.1111111</td>
<td style="text-align: right;">0.1666667</td>
<td style="text-align: right;">1</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

Pairwise Comparison Matrix for Hardware Systems
